5 Common Tropes in Wuxia Stories and Writings

Insurgency: Many best-selling Wuxia novels are set in the Qing Dynasty, and to a lesser extent, the Yuan and Southern Song Dynasty. As is well-known, these were the centuries when China was under threat, or already conquered and ruled by foreign powers. Wuxia stories set in these periods thus often feature martial artists gathering to resist invasion or to overthrow occupying forces. Many of the genre’s most beloved characters also hail from such works.

Legendary Weapons or Skills: With kung fu being the heart of Wuxia, many stories naturally involve quests or competitions for legendary weapons (兵器 bing qi) and skills. In the case of the latter, it is usually some forbidden manual (秘笈 mi ji) that records exotic or lost kung fu techniques. To repeat, legendary weapons in Wuxia do not possess magical properties too. They are typically coveted for their finesse or are themselves keys to larger treasures.

Wulin Dominance: Wulin (武林), or Jianghu (江湖), is the world of Chinese martial artists. It encompasses all clans and sects, unaffiliated individuals, as well as the interactions between these characters and factions. Wuxia novels centered on Wulin thus frequently feature one clan or individual rising to power through sheer pugilistic superiority or ruthless machinations. The bulk of the story is then about the struggle to overthrow this tyrant. Typically, with the “main hero” mastering some form of superior technique.

Vengeance: The trope of vengeance is heavily used in Wuxia stories. Usually, it involves a conflicted individual seeking revenge for the murder of his clan or sect. Or it could be the quest to redeem one’s honor after a mortifying defeat.

Wulin Intrigue: Outside of insurgencies, inter-faction struggles, and so on, many Wuxia stories also examine the intricate relationships between larger-than-life characters. Common sub-themes include love, rivalry, greed, the burden of family name, and other human conflicts.